<p class="date">12<sup>th</sup> November 2020</p>

A priori knowledge of matters of fact is impossible:

> +++ FROM SLIDES

## Model

Hume's model of reasoning is the **cause and effect**, a connection between between a present fact and another one, in order to infer one from the other. Connecting an effect to a cause

??? We start from the effect or from the cause?

How are we able to make such an impact?

Starting from **experience**: it will also make us state that we can under certain conditions we can always project events in the future.

Experience of repeated connection creates some sort of expectation in us, which becomes a habit, a “**custom**”. We take cause and effects for granted, and it's kind of deceiving: we pretend we're making an inference, which is a logical process, while we're experience a psychological attitude, expectation.

### Counterarguments

Hume comes up with counterarguments to prove his thesis.

Trying to understand how the mind would proceed if we analyzed an event <u>without consulting past observations</u>:

1. The mind has to invent or imagine some event as an effect, arbitrarily
2. Tie between cause and and effect is then arbitrary, too

We need to speak about events, not objects (example of a rock breaking the window)

#### Hume's example

Imagine a billiard table. Nothing gives us the slightest hint that when a ball hits another ball the other one will go in a certain direction: **anything** can happen if we don't consider what we experienced previously. By reasoning only, we'll never be able to choose an outcome rather than another.

**Continguity**, **priority**, **regularity**

> +++ FROM SLIDES

<br>
<br>

---

There's thus an arbitrary tie between cause and effect, and only experience can help us, in this way.

> +++ FROM SLIDES “only experience tells us about cause and effect”

## Deductive vs Inductive reasoning

> EXAMPLES FROM SLIDES

Let's try to create a contradiction by denying the conclusions.

In the first case, the contradiction becomes quit clear, in the second case it doesn't actually occur a contradiction

### Adding a premise to statement II
 
### The problem of induction

from 11:48

The connection from an event to a conclusion isn't direct nor immediate. A **medium** (an additional premise) it's needed and Hume is quite skeptical about this medium and Hume points out several times that such a medium can't be rationally justified.

The premise (+++ FROM SLIDES) has to be that the future is 

### The Principle of Induction

Or ***Principle of the uniformity of nature***

+++ FROM SLIDES

This, according to Hume, can't be safely accepted.

By using the premise we'll introduce a “vicious circularity” because we're taking for granted the exact type of reasoning the validity of which we're trying to understand.

> +++ FROM SLIDES

So it becomes a question-begging argument

??? isn't it the same thing as the demonstration of Aristothelean first principles?

### Deductive vs Inductive circularity

#### Deductive circularity

The simplest version of this is an argument which uses its conclusion as its premise.

+++

#### Inductive circularity

`c` is the missing link, and we need to make it explicit, yet it's itself an inductive inference: it says exactly the same thing.

Circularity is vicious here because we're <q cite="">using induction to justify induction</q>**.

<br>
<br>

Why do we keep using inductive reasoning?

To Hume, there's no logical reason; the psychological explanation is the only reasonable one we can give.

The appeal to custom:

> +++ FROM SLIDES

> +++ FROM SLIDES

“Natural instinct”

If we can't set goals, expectations for our future, what would give us some sort of confidence about the purpose of the future?

> +++ FROM SLIDES

### Conclusion

- Inductive reasoning can't be logically justified
- Inductive reasoning is instinctual, thus inevitable
- Inductive reasoning is at the basis of our beliefs about the future
- Inductive reasoning informs both scientific inquiry and purposive action
- Inductive reasoning indispensable +++

<br>
<br>

## Questions

### 1

+++ FROM SLIDES

We'd start questioning several beliefs based on inductions:
- memories
- the durability of objects
- etc +++

### 2


+++ link with Russel

<br>
<br>

## Bertrand Russel

Via induction we can account for the **probability** of the conclusion, never certainty.

> +++ FROM SLIDES

Belief in the uniformity of nature -> probable reason

An asymptotic approach to certainty through probability.

<br>
<br>

It's habitual to form expectations in this inductive way, but can this habit be justified rationally? Is it reasonable anyway?

<br>
<br>

## Pragmatic Justification

By [Hans Reichenbach](+++)

Man makes a bet by adopting inductive reasoning: surely not asserting, but not even believing.

### “To posit”

> +++ FROM SLIDES

Induction is the best bet 

> The path +++ FROM SLIDES

“**feel**”

Is this a satisfactory solution? If yes, how is the success of science explainable up to now?

+++ link to

<br>

Next topic: [[Logical Positivism]]